627. macOS updates must upgrade the existing spaCR environment and relaunch

Status: DONE 2026-10-01 — implemented and focused validation completed 2026-10-01.
Native macOS acceptance remains unverified on this Linux host.

The user reports Check for updates > Install update closes spaCR, but reopening
its app prompts an interactive reinstall and ultimately starts the older
version. Their reliable workaround uses the existing bundled executable:
"$HOME/Library/Application Support/SpaCR/bootstrap/uv" pip install --upgrade --python "$HOME/Library/Application Support/SpaCR/venv/bin/python" spacr

Required: for this macOS online installation, confirm that spaCR will be
reinstalled, close it, upgrade the existing environment using its bundled uv,
and reopen automatically after successful installation and version verification.
Do not invoke the full first-install bootstrap, remove the working environment,
or leave the user answering installer y/n prompts. Investigate launcher version
checks so reopening cannot restore an older installer-pinned version. Preserve
settings, data, and the existing environment. Report upgrade failures without
claiming success. Keep Linux's working update behavior and supported Windows
and frozen-bundle update paths intact. Cross-reference N53 and N416; this
specific user-reported macOS online update loop is a new regression request.

Acceptance: exercise the confirmation/close/helper/relaunch path; verify exact
bundled uv and venv targeting, paths with spaces, parent-process wait, failed
upgrade handling, updated-version readback and a single automatic relaunch.
Verify a newer installed version does not trigger the launcher's older pinned
installer. Run relevant existing updater/platform checks. Distinguish modeled
macOS checks on Linux from actual native macOS acceptance.

Implementation and validation 2026-10-01:
- Confirmed the prior macOS online path deleted the private runtime, ran a
  downloaded pkg, then reopened its launcher. With Python missing, that
  launcher started the interactive first-use installer with its older pin.
- The new macos-online-uv-v1 adapter uses the existing bootstrap/uv and
  venv/bin/python paths from the running installation, including case and
  spaces. Its command ends in unpinned spacr, as explicitly requested.
- The GUI bypasses removal selection for this path. It confirms reinstall,
  then closes before the upgrade; the existing readiness protocol authorizes
  work only after cooperative shutdown passes all veto checks and the process
  exits. Cancel, expiry, missing executables and ambiguous runtime identities
  cannot fall back to removal or trigger an update after a later ordinary exit.
- A fresh private-Python process reads installed package metadata. The observed
  version must be at least the offered version and newer than the prior one.
  Only then is one private-Python -m spacr.qt relaunch requested. Failures are
  logged in ~/.spacr/logs/update.log without a false success or extra launch.
- The native C launcher already executes an existing runtime directly, without
  a version-pin comparison. No launcher modification was necessary.
- 41 backend and existing updater checks passed under a 1 GB single-thread cap,
  including real discovery, Linux/Windows legacy plan behavior, package target
  and backend preservation, OS-executed private executable shims, and compiled
  launcher behavior. Shims are not a real macOS package-install acceptance run.
- 36 Qt updater/shutdown/restart checks passed (7.46 s); two additional rendered
  message-box button tests passed (1.24 s). Online and frozen paths both cover
  cancellation, preparation failure, stale plans, timeout, shutdown vetoes and
  approval-before-teardown. The online confirmation screenshot was inspected.
- docs/source/installer_guide.rst describes the new workflow and failure log;
  the edited section parses without reStructuredText warnings. The N416 ledger
  records this explicitly requested exception to its historical cleanup policy.
- Existing Qt files retain their 18 pre-existing Ruff import-order findings;
  no new findings were introduced. New backend tests and backend checks passed
  their focused lint checks; git diff --check is clean.

Supporting work tracked under N615: the new confirmation has technically
reviewed translations in all nine locales. The standard catalog build and
full runtime audit passed in 0fb8102a2, including explicit close-before-update
and reopen-after-success wording. Public API prose will be refreshed in the
coordinated documentation pass.
No real package was installed during tests. A real native macOS update/relaunch
and Windows desktop acceptance were not performed. This fix is on nightly;
publication requires a future release containing it. The earlier 1.5.1.1 release
attempt remains blocked on the PyPI storage request (pypi/support#12512).
